# 📌 AI Research Papers (April28 to May04)

## 🔹 LLM

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [RayZer: A Self-supervised Large View Synthesis Model](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00702v1) | Hanwen Jiang, Hao Tan, Peng Wang, Haian Jin, Yue Zhao, Sai Bi, Kai Zhang, Fujun Luan, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Qixing Huang, Georgios Pavlakos | 2025-05-01 | LLM | We present RayZer, a self-supervised multi-view 3D Vision model trained without any 3D supervision, i.e., camera poses and scene geometry, while exhibiting emerging 3D awareness. Concretely, RayZer takes unposed and uncalibrated images as input, recovers camera parameters, reconstructs a scene representation, and synthesizes novel views. During training, RayZer relies solely on its self-predicted camera poses to render target views, eliminating the need for any ground-truth camera annotations and allowing RayZer to be trained with 2D image supervision. The emerging 3D awareness of RayZer is attributed to two key factors. First, we design a self-supervised framework, which achieves 3D-aware auto-encoding of input images by disentangling camera and scene representations. Second, we design a transformer-based model in which the only 3D prior is the ray structure, connecting camera, pixel, and scene simultaneously. RayZer demonstrates comparable or even superior novel view synthesis performance than ``oracle'' methods that rely on pose annotations in both training and testing. Project: https://hwjiang1510.github.io/RayZer/ | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00702v1) |
| [DeepCritic: Deliberate Critique with Large Language Models](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00662v1) | Wenkai Yang, Jingwen Chen, Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong Wen | 2025-05-01 | LLM, Optimization, RLHF, Fine-Tuning | As Large Language Models (LLMs) are rapidly evolving, providing accurate feedback and scalable oversight on their outputs becomes an urgent and critical problem. Leveraging LLMs as critique models to achieve automated supervision is a promising solution. In this work, we focus on studying and enhancing the math critique ability of LLMs. Current LLM critics provide critiques that are too shallow and superficial on each step, leading to low judgment accuracy and struggling to offer sufficient feedback for the LLM generator to correct mistakes. To tackle this issue, we propose a novel and effective two-stage framework to develop LLM critics that are capable of deliberately critiquing on each reasoning step of math solutions. In the first stage, we utilize Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct to generate 4.5K long-form critiques as seed data for supervised fine-tuning. Each seed critique consists of deliberate step-wise critiques that includes multi-perspective verifications as well as in-depth critiques of initial critiques for each reasoning step. Then, we perform reinforcement learning on the fine-tuned model with either existing human-labeled data from PRM800K or our automatically annotated data obtained via Monte Carlo sampling-based correctness estimation, to further incentivize its critique ability. Our developed critique model built on Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct not only significantly outperforms existing LLM critics (including the same-sized DeepSeek-R1-distill models and GPT-4o) on various error identification benchmarks, but also more effectively helps the LLM generator refine erroneous steps through more detailed feedback. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00662v1) |
## 🔹 Diffusion Models

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [Controllable Weather Synthesis and Removal with Video Diffusion Models](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00704v1) | Chih-Hao Lin, Zian Wang, Ruofan Liang, Yuxuan Zhang, Sanja Fidler, Shenlong Wang, Zan Gojcic | 2025-05-01 | Diffusion Models, Multimodal AI | Generating realistic and controllable weather effects in videos is valuable for many applications. Physics-based weather simulation requires precise reconstructions that are hard to scale to in-the-wild videos, while current video editing often lacks realism and control. In this work, we introduce WeatherWeaver, a video diffusion model that synthesizes diverse weather effects -- including rain, snow, fog, and clouds -- directly into any input video without the need for 3D modeling. Our model provides precise control over weather effect intensity and supports blending various weather types, ensuring both realism and adaptability. To overcome the scarcity of paired training data, we propose a novel data strategy combining synthetic videos, generative image editing, and auto-labeled real-world videos. Extensive evaluations show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in weather simulation and removal, providing high-quality, physically plausible, and scene-identity-preserving results over various real-world videos. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00704v1) |
| [T2I-R1: Reinforcing Image Generation with Collaborative Semantic-level
  and Token-level CoT](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00703v1) | Dongzhi Jiang, Ziyu Guo, Renrui Zhang, Zhuofan Zong, Hao Li, Le Zhuo, Shilin Yan, Pheng-Ann Heng, Hongsheng Li | 2025-05-01 | Diffusion Models, Prompt Engineering, RLHF | Recent advancements in large language models have demonstrated how chain-of-thought (CoT) and reinforcement learning (RL) can improve performance. However, applying such reasoning strategies to the visual generation domain remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we present T2I-R1, a novel reasoning-enhanced text-to-image generation model, powered by RL with a bi-level CoT reasoning process. Specifically, we identify two levels of CoT that can be utilized to enhance different stages of generation: (1) the semantic-level CoT for high-level planning of the prompt and (2) the token-level CoT for low-level pixel processing during patch-by-patch generation. To better coordinate these two levels of CoT, we introduce BiCoT-GRPO with an ensemble of generation rewards, which seamlessly optimizes both generation CoTs within the same training step. By applying our reasoning strategies to the baseline model, Janus-Pro, we achieve superior performance with 13% improvement on T2I-CompBench and 19% improvement on the WISE benchmark, even surpassing the state-of-the-art model FLUX.1. Code is available at: https://github.com/CaraJ7/T2I-R1 | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00703v1) |
| [GuideSR: Rethinking Guidance for One-Step High-Fidelity Diffusion-Based
  Super-Resolution](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00687v1) | Aditya Arora, Zhengzhong Tu, Yufei Wang, Ruizheng Bai, Jian Wang, Sizhuo Ma | 2025-05-01 | Diffusion Models | In this paper, we propose GuideSR, a novel single-step diffusion-based image super-resolution (SR) model specifically designed to enhance image fidelity. Existing diffusion-based SR approaches typically adapt pre-trained generative models to image restoration tasks by adding extra conditioning on a VAE-downsampled representation of the degraded input, which often compromises structural fidelity. GuideSR addresses this limitation by introducing a dual-branch architecture comprising: (1) a Guidance Branch that preserves high-fidelity structures from the original-resolution degraded input, and (2) a Diffusion Branch, which a pre-trained latent diffusion model to enhance perceptual quality. Unlike conventional conditioning mechanisms, our Guidance Branch features a tailored structure for image restoration tasks, combining Full Resolution Blocks (FRBs) with channel attention and an Image Guidance Network (IGN) with guided attention. By embedding detailed structural information directly into the restoration pipeline, GuideSR produces sharper and more visually consistent results. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate that GuideSR achieves state-of-the-art performance while maintaining the low computational cost of single-step approaches, with up to 1.39dB PSNR gain on challenging real-world datasets. Our approach consistently outperforms existing methods across various reference-based metrics including PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, DISTS and FID, further representing a practical advancement for real-world image restoration. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00687v1) |
| [The local coupling of noise technique and its application to lower error
  bounds for strong approximation of SDEs with irregular coefficients](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00656v1) | Simon Ellinger | 2025-05-01 | Diffusion Models | In recent years, interest in approximation methods for stochastic differential equations (SDEs) with non-Lipschitz continuous coefficients has increased. We show lower bounds for the $L^p$-error of such methods in the case of approximation at a single point in time or globally in time. On the one hand, we show that for a large class of piecewise Lipschitz continuous drifts and non-additive diffusions the best possible $L^p$-error rate for final time approximation that can be achieved by any method based on finitely many evaluations of the driving Brownian motion is at most $3/4$, which was previously known only for additive diffusions. Moreover, we show that the best $L^p$-error rate for global approximation that can be achieved by any method based on finitely many evaluations of the driving Brownian motion is at most $1/2$ when the drift is locally bounded and the diffusion is locally Lipschitz continuous.   For the derivation of the lower bounds we introduce a new method of proof: the local coupling of noise technique. Using this technique when approximating a solution $X$ of the SDE at the final time, a lower bound for the $L^p$-error of any approximation method based on evaluations of the driving Brownian motion at the points $t_1 < \dots < t_n$ can be determined by the $L^p$-distances of solutions of the same SDE on $[t_{i-1}, t_i]$ with initial values $X_{t_{i-1}}$ and driving Brownian motions that are coupled at $t_{i-1}, t_i$ and independent, conditioned on the values of the Brownian motion at $t_{i-1}, t_i$. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00656v1) |
## 🔹 Multimodal AI

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [Robotic Visual Instruction](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00693v1) | Yanbang Li, Ziyang Gong, Haoyang Li, Haoyang Li, Xiaoqi Huang, Haolan Kang, Guangping Bai, Xianzheng Ma | 2025-05-01 | Multimodal AI | Recently, natural language has been the primary medium for human-robot interaction. However, its inherent lack of spatial precision for robotic control introduces challenges such as ambiguity and verbosity. To address these limitations, we introduce the Robotic Visual Instruction (RoVI), a novel paradigm to guide robotic tasks through an object-centric, hand-drawn symbolic representation. RoVI effectively encodes spatial-temporal information into human-interpretable visual instructions through 2D sketches, utilizing arrows, circles, colors, and numbers to direct 3D robotic manipulation. To enable robots to understand RoVI better and generate precise actions based on RoVI, we present Visual Instruction Embodied Workflow (VIEW), a pipeline formulated for RoVI-conditioned policies. This approach leverages Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to interpret RoVI inputs, decode spatial and temporal constraints from 2D pixel space via keypoint extraction, and then transform them into executable 3D action sequences. We additionally curate a specialized dataset of 15K instances to fine-tune small VLMs for edge deployment, enabling them to effectively learn RoVI capabilities. Our approach is rigorously validated across 11 novel tasks in both real and simulated environments, demonstrating significant generalization capability. Notably, VIEW achieves an 87.5% success rate in real-world scenarios involving unseen tasks that feature multi-step actions, with disturbances, and trajectory-following requirements. Code and Datasets in this paper will be released soon. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00693v1) |
## 🔹 Optimization

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [Physical Limits and Optimal Synthesis of Beyond Diagonal Anomalous
  Scatterers](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00691v1) | Mats Gustafsson | 2025-05-01 | Optimization | Realizing metasurfaces for anomalous scattering is fundamental to designing reflector arrays, reconfigurable intelligent surfaces, and metasurface antennas. However, the basic cost of steering scattering into non-specular directions is not fully understood. This paper derives tight physical bounds on anomalous scattering using antenna array systems equipped with non-local matching networks. The matching networks are explicitly synthesized based on the solutions of the optimization problems that define these bounds. Furthermore, we analyze fundamental limits for metasurface antennas implemented with metallic and dielectric materials exhibiting minimal loss within a finite design region. The results reveal a typical 6dB reduction in bistatic radar cross section (RCS) in anomalous directions compared to the forward direction. Numerical examples complement the theory and illustrate the inherent cost of achieving anomalous scattering relative to forward or specular scattering for canonical configurations. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00691v1) |
| [Multi-Constraint Safe Reinforcement Learning via Closed-form Solution
  for Log-Sum-Exp Approximation of Control Barrier Functions](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00671v1) | Chenggang Wang, Xinyi Wang, Yutong Dong, Lei Song, Xinping Guan | 2025-05-01 | Optimization, RLHF | The safety of training task policies and their subsequent application using reinforcement learning (RL) methods has become a focal point in the field of safe RL. A central challenge in this area remains the establishment of theoretical guarantees for safety during both the learning and deployment processes. Given the successful implementation of Control Barrier Function (CBF)-based safety strategies in a range of control-affine robotic systems, CBF-based safe RL demonstrates significant promise for practical applications in real-world scenarios. However, integrating these two approaches presents several challenges. First, embedding safety optimization within the RL training pipeline requires that the optimization outputs be differentiable with respect to the input parameters, a condition commonly referred to as differentiable optimization, which is non-trivial to solve. Second, the differentiable optimization framework confronts significant efficiency issues, especially when dealing with multi-constraint problems. To address these challenges, this paper presents a CBF-based safe RL architecture that effectively mitigates the issues outlined above. The proposed approach constructs a continuous AND logic approximation for the multiple constraints using a single composite CBF. By leveraging this approximation, a close-form solution of the quadratic programming is derived for the policy network in RL, thereby circumventing the need for differentiable optimization within the end-to-end safe RL pipeline. This strategy significantly reduces computational complexity because of the closed-form solution while maintaining safety guarantees. Simulation results demonstrate that, in comparison to existing approaches relying on differentiable optimization, the proposed method significantly reduces training computational costs while ensuring provable safety throughout the training process. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00671v1) |
| [TumorTwin: A python framework for patient-specific digital twins in
  oncology](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00670v1) | Michael Kapteyn, Anirban Chaudhuri, Ernesto A. B. F. Lima, Graham Pash, Rafael Bravo, Karen Willcox, Thomas E. Yankeelov, David A. Hormuth II | 2025-05-01 | Optimization | Background: Advances in the theory and methods of computational oncology have enabled accurate characterization and prediction of tumor growth and treatment response on a patient-specific basis. This capability can be integrated into a digital twin framework in which bi-directional data-flow between the physical tumor and the digital tumor facilitate dynamic model re-calibration, uncertainty quantification, and clinical decision-support via recommendation of optimal therapeutic interventions. However, many digital twin frameworks rely on bespoke implementations tailored to each disease site, modeling choice, and algorithmic implementation.   Findings: We present TumorTwin, a modular software framework for initializing, updating, and leveraging patient-specific cancer tumor digital twins. TumorTwin is publicly available as a Python package, with associated documentation, datasets, and tutorials. Novel contributions include the development of a patient-data structure adaptable to different disease sites, a modular architecture to enable the composition of different data, model, solver, and optimization objects, and CPU- or GPU-parallelized implementations of forward model solves and gradient computations. We demonstrate the functionality of TumorTwin via an in silico dataset of high-grade glioma growth and response to radiation therapy.   Conclusions: The TumorTwin framework enables rapid prototyping and testing of image-guided oncology digital twins. This allows researchers to systematically investigate different models, algorithms, disease sites, or treatment decisions while leveraging robust numerical and computational infrastructure. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00670v1) |
| [Deep Reinforcement Learning for Urban Air Quality Management:
  Multi-Objective Optimization of Pollution Mitigation Booth Placement in
  Metropolitan Environments](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00668v1) | Kirtan Rajesh, Suvidha Rupesh Kumar | 2025-05-01 | Optimization, RLHF, Training & Evaluation | Urban air pollution remains a pressing global concern, particularly in densely populated and traffic-intensive metropolitan areas like Delhi, where exposure to harmful pollutants severely impacts public health. Delhi, being one of the most polluted cities globally, experiences chronic air quality issues due to vehicular emissions, industrial activities, and construction dust, which exacerbate its already fragile atmospheric conditions. Traditional pollution mitigation strategies, such as static air purifying installations, often fail to maximize their impact due to suboptimal placement and limited adaptability to dynamic urban environments. This study presents a novel deep reinforcement learning (DRL) framework to optimize the placement of air purification booths to improve the air quality index (AQI) in the city of Delhi. We employ Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), a state-of-the-art reinforcement learning algorithm, to iteratively learn and identify high-impact locations based on multiple spatial and environmental factors, including population density, traffic patterns, industrial influence, and green space constraints. Our approach is benchmarked against conventional placement strategies, including random and greedy AQI-based methods, using multi-dimensional performance evaluation metrics such as AQI improvement, spatial coverage, population and traffic impact, and spatial entropy. Experimental results demonstrate that the RL-based approach outperforms baseline methods by achieving a balanced and effective distribution of air purification infrastructure. Notably, the DRL framework achieves an optimal trade-off between AQI reduction and high-coverage deployment, ensuring equitable environmental benefits across urban regions. The findings underscore the potential of AI-driven spatial optimization in advancing smart city initiatives and data-driven urban air quality management. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00668v1) |
| [Wasserstein Policy Optimization](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00663v1) | David Pfau, Ian Davies, Diana Borsa, Joao G. M. Araujo, Brendan Tracey, Hado van Hasselt | 2025-05-01 | Optimization, RLHF | We introduce Wasserstein Policy Optimization (WPO), an actor-critic algorithm for reinforcement learning in continuous action spaces. WPO can be derived as an approximation to Wasserstein gradient flow over the space of all policies projected into a finite-dimensional parameter space (e.g., the weights of a neural network), leading to a simple and completely general closed-form update. The resulting algorithm combines many properties of deterministic and classic policy gradient methods. Like deterministic policy gradients, it exploits knowledge of the gradient of the action-value function with respect to the action. Like classic policy gradients, it can be applied to stochastic policies with arbitrary distributions over actions -- without using the reparameterization trick. We show results on the DeepMind Control Suite and a magnetic confinement fusion task which compare favorably with state-of-the-art continuous control methods. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00663v1) |
| [On the generalization of language models from in-context learning and
  finetuning: a controlled study](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00661v1) | Andrew K. Lampinen, Arslan Chaudhry, Stephanie C. Y. Chan, Cody Wild, Diane Wan, Alex Ku, Jörg Bornschein, Razvan Pascanu, Murray Shanahan, James L. McClelland | 2025-05-01 | Optimization, Training & Evaluation | Large language models exhibit exciting capabilities, yet can show surprisingly narrow generalization from finetuning -- from failing to generalize to simple reversals of relations they are trained on, to missing logical deductions that can be made from trained information. These failures to generalize from fine-tuning can hinder practical application of these models. However, language models' in-context learning shows different inductive biases, and can generalize better in some of these cases. Here, we explore these differences in generalization between in-context- and fine-tuning-based learning. To do so, we constructed several novel datasets to evaluate and improve models' ability to generalize from finetuning data. The datasets are constructed to isolate the knowledge in the dataset from that in pretraining, to create clean tests of generalization. We expose pretrained large models to controlled subsets of the information in these datasets -- either in context, or through fine-tuning -- and evaluate their performance on test sets that require various types of generalization. We find overall that in data-matched settings, in-context learning can generalize more flexibly than fine-tuning (though we also find some qualifications of prior findings, such as cases when fine-tuning can generalize to reversals embedded in a larger structure of knowledge). We build on these findings to propose a method to enable improved generalization from fine-tuning: adding in-context inferences to finetuning data. We show that this method improves generalization across various splits of our datasets and other benchmarks. Our results have implications for understanding the inductive biases of different modes of learning in language models, and practically improving their performance. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00661v1) |
| [RIS Partitioning and User Clustering for Resilient Non-Orthogonal
  Multiple Access UAV Networks](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00658v1) | Mohammed Saif, Shahrokh Valaee | 2025-05-01 | Optimization | The integration of reconfigurable intelligent surfaces (RISs) and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) has emerged as a promising solution for enhancing connectivity in future wireless networks. This paper designs well-connected and resilient UAV networks by deploying and virtually partitioning multiple RISs to create multiple RIS-aided links, focusing on a link-layer perspective. The RIS-aided links are created to connect user equipment (UE) to blocked and reliable UAVs, where multiple UEs can transmit to same UAV via RIS using non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA), granting access to UEs and maximizing network connectivity. We first derive exact and approximated closed-form expressions for signal-to-interference plus noise ratio (SINR) based on aligned and non-aligned RIS-aided beams. Then, we propose to formulate the problem of maximizing network connectivity that jointly considers (i) UE NOMA clustering, (ii) RIS-aided link selection, and (ii) virtual RIS partitioning. This problem is a computationally expensive combinatorial optimization. To tackle this problem, a two-step iterative approach, called RIS-aided NOMA, is proposed. In the first step, the UEs are clustered to the RISs according to their channel gains, while UAVs are associated to those generated clusters based on their reliability, which measures the criticality of UAVs. The second step optimally partitions the RISs to support each of the cluster members. In this step, we derive the closed-form equations for the optimal partitioning of RISs within the clusters. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed RIS-aided NOMA yields a gain of 30% to 40%, respectively, compared to UAV traditional scheme. The finding emphasizes the potential of integrating RIS with UAV communications as a robust and reliable connectivity solution for future wireless communication systems. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00658v1) |
## 🔹 Scaling Laws

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [Visual Test-time Scaling for GUI Agent Grounding](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00684v1) | Tiange Luo, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Justin Johnson, Honglak Lee | 2025-05-01 | Scaling Laws | We introduce RegionFocus, a visual test-time scaling approach for Vision Language Model Agents. Understanding webpages is challenging due to the visual complexity of GUI images and the large number of interface elements, making accurate action selection difficult. Our approach dynamically zooms in on relevant regions, reducing background clutter and improving grounding accuracy. To support this process, we propose an image-as-map mechanism that visualizes key landmarks at each step, providing a transparent action record and enables the agent to effectively choose among action candidates. Even with a simple region selection strategy, we observe significant performance gains of 28+\% on Screenspot-pro and 24+\% on WebVoyager benchmarks on top of two state-of-the-art open vision language model agents, UI-TARS and Qwen2.5-VL, highlighting the effectiveness of visual test-time scaling in interactive settings. We achieve a new state-of-the-art grounding performance of 61.6\% on the ScreenSpot-Pro benchmark by applying RegionFocus to a Qwen2.5-VL-72B model. Our code will be released publicly at https://github.com/tiangeluo/RegionFocus. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00684v1) |
## 🔹 Training & Evaluation

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [Comprehensive Study on Heisenberg-limited Quantum Algorithms for
  Multiple Observables Estimation](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00698v2) | Yuki Koizumi, Kaito Wada, Wataru Mizukami, Nobuyuki Yoshioka | 2025-05-01 | Training & Evaluation, Scaling Laws | In the accompanying paper of arXiv:2505.00697, we have presented a generalized scheme of adaptive quantum gradient estimation (QGE) algorithm, and further proposed two practical variants which not only achieve doubly quantum enhancement in query complexity regarding estimation precision and number of observables, but also enable minimal cost to estimate $k$-RDMs in fermionic systems among existing quantum algorithms. Here, we provide full descriptions on the algorithm, and provide theoretical guarantee for the estimation precision in terms of the root mean squared error. Furthermore, we analyze the performance of the quantum amplitude estimation algorithm, another variant of the Heisenberg-limited scaling algorithm, and show how the estimation error is minimized under the circuit structure that resembles the phase estimation algorithm. We finally describe the details for the numerical evaluation of the query complexity of the Heisenberg-limited algorithms and sampling-based methods to make a thorough comparison in the task of estimating fermionic $k$-RDMs. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00698v2) |
## 🔹 Model Evaluation

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [MINERVA: Evaluating Complex Video Reasoning](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00681v1) | Arsha Nagrani, Sachit Menon, Ahmet Iscen, Shyamal Buch, Ramin Mehran, Nilpa Jha, Anja Hauth, Yukun Zhu, Carl Vondrick, Mikhail Sirotenko, Cordelia Schmid, Tobias Weyand | 2025-05-01 | Model Evaluation, Training & Evaluation, Multimodal AI | Multimodal LLMs are turning their focus to video benchmarks, however most video benchmarks only provide outcome supervision, with no intermediate or interpretable reasoning steps. This makes it challenging to assess if models are truly able to combine perceptual and temporal information to reason about videos, or simply get the correct answer by chance or by exploiting linguistic biases. To remedy this, we provide a new video reasoning dataset called MINERVA for modern multimodal models. Each question in the dataset comes with 5 answer choices, as well as detailed, hand-crafted reasoning traces. Our dataset is multimodal, diverse in terms of video domain and length, and consists of complex multi-step questions. Extensive benchmarking shows that our dataset provides a challenge for frontier open-source and proprietary models. We perform fine-grained error analysis to identify common failure modes across various models, and create a taxonomy of reasoning errors. We use this to explore both human and LLM-as-a-judge methods for scoring video reasoning traces, and find that failure modes are primarily related to temporal localization, followed by visual perception errors, as opposed to logical or completeness errors. The dataset, along with questions, answer candidates and reasoning traces will be publicly available under https://github.com/google-deepmind/neptune?tab=readme-ov-file\#minerva. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00681v1) |
## 🔹 Responsible AI

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [On the Importance of Gaussianizing Representations](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00685v1) | Daniel Eftekhari, Vardan Papyan | 2025-05-01 | Responsible AI, Model Evaluation | The normal distribution plays a central role in information theory - it is at the same time the best-case signal and worst-case noise distribution, has the greatest representational capacity of any distribution, and offers an equivalence between uncorrelatedness and independence for joint distributions. Accounting for the mean and variance of activations throughout the layers of deep neural networks has had a significant effect on facilitating their effective training, but seldom has a prescription for precisely what distribution these activations should take, and how this might be achieved, been offered. Motivated by the information-theoretic properties of the normal distribution, we address this question and concurrently present normality normalization: a novel normalization layer which encourages normality in the feature representations of neural networks using the power transform and employs additive Gaussian noise during training. Our experiments comprehensively demonstrate the effectiveness of normality normalization, in regards to its generalization performance on an array of widely used model and dataset combinations, its strong performance across various common factors of variation such as model width, depth, and training minibatch size, its suitability for usage wherever existing normalization layers are conventionally used, and as a means to improving model robustness to random perturbations. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00685v1) |
| [Linear Parameter Varying Attitude Control For CubeSats Using
  Electrospray Thrusters](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00677v1) | Felix Biertümpfel, Emily Burgin, Hanna-Lee Harjono, Paulo Lozano, Harald Pfifer | 2025-05-01 | Responsible AI, Model Evaluation | This paper proposes the design of a single linear parameter-varying (LPV) controller for the attitude control of CubeSats using electro spray thrusters. CubeSat attitude control based on electro spray thrusters faces two main challenges. Firstly, the thruster can only generate a small control torque leading to easily saturating the actuation system. Secondly, CubeSats need to operate multiple different maneuvers from large to small slews to pointing tasks. LPV control is ideally suitable to address these challenges. The proposed design follows a mixed-sensitivity control scheme. The parameter-varying weights depend on the attitude error and are derived from the performance and robustness requirements of individual typical CubeSat maneuvers. The controller is synthesized by minimizing the induced L2-norm of the closed-loop interconnections between the controller and weighted plant. The performance and robustness of the controller is demonstrated on a simulation of the MIT Space Propulsion Lab's Magnetic Levitation CubeSat Testbed. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00677v1) |
| [Joint inference for gravitational wave signals and glitches using a
  data-informed glitch model](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00657v1) | Ann-Kristin Malz, John Veitch | 2025-05-01 | Responsible AI, Model Evaluation | Gravitational wave data are often contaminated by non-Gaussian noise transients, glitches, which can bias the inference of astrophysical signal parameters. Traditional approaches either subtract glitches in a pre-processing step, or a glitch model can be included from an agnostic wavelet basis (e.g. BayesWave). In this work, we introduce a machine-learning-based approach to build a parameterised model of glitches. We train a normalising flow on known glitches from the Gravity Spy catalogue, constructing an informative prior on the glitch model. By incorporating this model into the Bayesian inference analysis with Bilby, we estimate glitch and signal parameters simultaneously. We demonstrate the performance of our method through bias reduction, glitch identification and Bayesian model selection on real glitches. Our results show that this approach effectively removes glitches from the data, significantly improving source parameter estimation and reducing bias. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00657v1) |
## 🔹 Autonomous Agents

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [Towards Autonomous Micromobility through Scalable Urban Simulation](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00690v1) | Wayne Wu, Honglin He, Chaoyuan Zhang, Jack He, Seth Z. Zhao, Ran Gong, Quanyi Li, Bolei Zhou | 2025-05-01 | Autonomous Agents, Scaling Laws | Micromobility, which utilizes lightweight mobile machines moving in urban public spaces, such as delivery robots and mobility scooters, emerges as a promising alternative to vehicular mobility. Current micromobility depends mostly on human manual operation (in-person or remote control), which raises safety and efficiency concerns when navigating busy urban environments full of unpredictable obstacles and pedestrians. Assisting humans with AI agents in maneuvering micromobility devices presents a viable solution for enhancing safety and efficiency. In this work, we present a scalable urban simulation solution to advance autonomous micromobility. First, we build URBAN-SIM - a high-performance robot learning platform for large-scale training of embodied agents in interactive urban scenes. URBAN-SIM contains three critical modules: Hierarchical Urban Generation pipeline, Interactive Dynamics Generation strategy, and Asynchronous Scene Sampling scheme, to improve the diversity, realism, and efficiency of robot learning in simulation. Then, we propose URBAN-BENCH - a suite of essential tasks and benchmarks to gauge various capabilities of the AI agents in achieving autonomous micromobility. URBAN-BENCH includes eight tasks based on three core skills of the agents: Urban Locomotion, Urban Navigation, and Urban Traverse. We evaluate four robots with heterogeneous embodiments, such as the wheeled and legged robots, across these tasks. Experiments on diverse terrains and urban structures reveal each robot's strengths and limitations. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00690v1) |
## 🔹 Security & Adversarial ML

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [The Architecture Tradeoff and Risk Analysis Framework (ATRAF): A Unified
  Approach for Evaluating Software Architectures, Reference Architectures, and
  Architectural Frameworks](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00688v1) | Amine Ben Hassouna | 2025-05-01 | Security & Adversarial ML, Training & Evaluation | Modern software systems are guided by hierarchical architectural concepts -- software architectures, reference architectures, and architectural frameworks -- each operating at a distinct level of abstraction. These artifacts promote reuse, scalability, and consistency, but also embed tradeoffs that shape critical quality attributes such as modifiability, performance, and security. Existing evaluation methods, such as the Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Method (ATAM), focus on system-specific architectures and are not designed to address the broader generality and variability of higher-level architectural forms. To close this gap, we introduce the Architecture Tradeoff and Risk Analysis Framework (ATRAF) -- a unified, scenario-driven framework for evaluating tradeoffs and risks across architectural levels. ATRAF encompasses three methods: the Architecture Tradeoff and Risk Analysis Method (ATRAM), extending ATAM with enhanced risk identification for concrete systems; the Reference Architecture Tradeoff and Risk Analysis Method (RATRAM), adapting ATRAM to the evaluation of domain-level reference architectures; and the Architectural Framework Tradeoff and Risk Analysis Method (AFTRAM), supporting the evaluation of architectural frameworks that guide entire system families. All three methods follow an iterative spiral process that enables the identification of sensitivities, tradeoffs, and risks while supporting continuous refinement of architectural artifacts. We demonstrate ATRAF through progressively abstracted examples derived from the Remote Temperature Sensor (RTS) case, originally introduced in the ATAM literature. ATRAF equips architects, reference modelers, and framework designers with a practical, systematic approach for analyzing design alternatives and managing quality attribute tradeoffs early in the lifecycle and across all levels of architectural abstraction. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00688v1) |
| [Key exchange protocol based on circulant matrix action over
  congruence-simple semiring](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00664v1) | Alvaro Otero Sanchez | 2025-05-01 | Security & Adversarial ML | We present a new key exchange protocol based on circulant matrices acting on matrices over a congruence-simple semiring. We describe how to compute matrices with the necessary properties for the implementation of the protocol. Additionally, we provide an analysis of its computational cost and its security against known attacks. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00664v1) |
## 🔹 General AI

| 📄 Title | 🖊 Authors | 📅 Date | 🏷 Tags | 📜 Summary | 🔗 Link |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| [A log-depth in-place quantum Fourier transform that rarely needs
  ancillas](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00701v1) | Gregory D. Kahanamoku-Meyer, John Blue, Thiago Bergamaschi, Craig Gidney, Isaac L. Chuang | 2025-05-01 | General AI | When designing quantum circuits for a given unitary, it can be much cheaper to achieve a good approximation on most inputs than on all inputs. In this work we formalize this idea, and propose that such "optimistic quantum circuits" are often sufficient in the context of larger quantum algorithms. For the rare algorithm in which a subroutine needs to be a good approximation on all inputs, we provide a reduction which transforms optimistic circuits into general ones. Applying these ideas, we build an optimistic circuit for the in-place quantum Fourier transform (QFT). Our circuit has depth $O(\log (n / \epsilon))$ for tunable error parameter $\epsilon$, uses $n$ total qubits, i.e. no ancillas, is logarithmically local for input qubits arranged in 1D, and is measurement-free. The circuit's error is bounded by $\epsilon$ on all input states except an $O(\epsilon)$-sized fraction of the Hilbert space. The circuit is also rather simple and thus may be practically useful. Combined with recent QFT-based fast arithmetic constructions [arXiv:2403.18006], the optimistic QFT yields factoring circuits of nearly linear depth using only $2n + O(n/\log n)$ total qubits. Applying our reduction technique, we also construct the first approximate QFT to achieve the asymptotically optimal depth of $O(\log (n/\epsilon))$ with a sublinear number of ancilla qubits, well-controlled error on all inputs, and no intermediate measurements. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00701v1) |
| [Luminosity Function of collapsar Gamma-Ray Bursts:the Progenitor of Long
  Gamma-Ray Bursts Is Not Singular](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00700v1) | Yan-Kun Qu, Zhong-Xiao Man, Shuang-Xi Yi, Yu-Peng Yang | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are powerful probes of the high-redshift universe. However, the proportion of collapsar GRBs among long GRBs and their event rate relative to the star formation rate (SFR) remain contentious issues. We assume that long GRBs with $z\geq 2$ are all collapsar GRBs and construct the luminosity function using a high-redshift sample from the Swift satellite spanning 2004 to 2019. We model the luminosity function with a broken power-law form and consider three scenarios: no evolution, luminosity evolution, and density evolution. Our results are as follows: 1) The no-evolution model can be ruled out. 2) The fitting results indicate that to adequately explain the observations, a significant redshift evolution in either luminosity (evolution index $\delta = 1.54^{+0.21}_{-0.22}$) or density ($\delta = 2.09^{+0.29}_{-0.26}$) is required. This excludes the possibility that the evolution of long GRBs with redshift is due to contamination from non-collapsar GRBs. 3) The luminosity evolution model predicts that the number of collapsar GRBs with $z<2$ and $P \geq 1 \, \text{ph} \, \text{cm}^{-2} \, \text{s}^{-1}$ is 138.6, accounting for 82.5% of the observed long GRBs with $z<2$ and $P \geq 1 \, \text{ph} \, \text{cm}^{-2} \, \text{s}^{-1}$. The density evolution model predicts that the number of collapsar GRBs with $z<2$ and $P \geq 1 \, \text{ph} \, \text{cm}^{-2} \, \text{s}^{-1}$ is 80.2, accounting for 47.7% of the observation. Regardless of the model, a substantial portion of the long GRBs are not collapsar GRBs. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00700v1) |
| [Polynomial and rational matrices with the invariant rational functions
  and the four sequences of minimal indices prescribed](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00699v1) | Itziar Baragaña, Froilán M. Dopico, Silvia Marcaida, Alicia Roca | 2025-05-01 | General AI | The complete eigenstructure, or structural data, of a rational matrix $R(s)$ is comprised by its invariant rational functions, both finite and at infinity, which in turn determine its finite and infinite pole and zero structures, respectively, and by the minimal indices of its left and right null spaces. These quantities arise in many applications and have been thoroughly studied in numerous references. However, other two fundamental subspaces of $R(s)$ in contrast have received much less attention: the column and row spaces, which also have their associated minimal indices. This work solves the problems of finding necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of rational matrices in two scenarios: (a) when the invariant rational functions and the minimal indices of the column and row spaces are prescribed, and (b) when the complete eigenstructure together with the minimal indices of the column and row spaces are prescribed. The particular, but extremely important, cases of these problems for polynomial matrices are solved first and are the main tool for solving the general problems. The results in this work complete and non-trivially extend the necessary and sufficient conditions recently obtained for the existence of polynomial and rational matrices when only the complete eigenstructure is prescribed. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00699v1) |
| [Faster Quantum Algorithm for Multiple Observables Estimation in
  Fermionic Problems](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00697v2) | Yuki Koizumi, Kaito Wada, Wataru Mizukami, Nobuyuki Yoshioka | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Achieving quantum advantage in efficiently estimating collective properties of quantum many-body systems remains a fundamental goal in quantum computing. While the quantum gradient estimation (QGE) algorithm has been shown to achieve doubly quantum enhancement in the precision and the number of observables, it remains unclear whether one benefits in practical applications. In this work, we present a generalized framework of adaptive QGE algorithm, and further propose two variants which enable us to estimate the collective properties of fermionic systems using the smallest cost among existing quantum algorithms. The first method utilizes the symmetry inherent in the target state, and the second method enables estimation in a single-shot manner using the parallel scheme. We show that our proposal offers a quadratic speedup compared with prior QGE algorithms in the task of fermionic partial tomography for systems with limited particle numbers. Furthermore, we provide the numerical demonstration that, for a problem of estimating fermionic 2-RDMs, our proposals improve the number of queries to the target state preparation oracle by a factor of 100 for the nitrogenase FeMo cofactor and by a factor of 500 for Fermi-Hubbard model of 100 sites. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00697v2) |
| [On the Beilinson-Bloch conjecture over function fields](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00696v1) | Matt Broe | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Let k be a field and X a smooth projective variety over k. When k is a number field, the Beilinson--Bloch conjecture relates the ranks of the Chow groups of X to the order of vanishing of certain L-functions. We consider the same conjecture when k is a global function field, and give a criterion for the conjecture to hold for X, extending an earlier result of Jannsen. As an application, we provide a new proof of a theorem of Geisser connecting the Tate conjecture over finite fields and the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture over function fields. We then prove the Tate conjecture for a product of a smooth projective curve with a power of a CM elliptic curve over any finitely generated field, and thus deduce special cases of the Beilinson--Bloch conjecture. In the process we obtain a conditional answer to a question of Moonen on the Chow groups of powers of ordinary CM elliptic curves over arbitrary fields. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00696v1) |
| [Simple Holography in General Spacetimes](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00695v1) | Raphael Bousso, Elisa Tabor | 2025-05-01 | General AI | The simple or "outermost" wedge in AdS is the portion of the entanglement wedge that can be reconstructed with sub-exponential effort from CFT data. Here we furnish a definition in arbitrary spacetimes: given an input wedge $a$ analogous to a CFT boundary region, the simple wedge $z(a)$ is the largest wedge accessible by a "zigzag," a certain sequence of antinormal light-sheets. We show that $z(a)$ is a throat, and that it is contained in every other throat. This implies that $z(a)$ is unique; that it is contained in the generalized entanglement wedge; and that it reduces to the AdS prescription as a special case.   The zigzag explicitly constructs a preferred Cauchy slice that renders the simple wedge accessible from $a$; thus it adds a novel structure even in AdS. So far, no spacelike construction is known to reproduce these results, even in time-symmetric settings. This may have implications for the modeling of holographic encoding by tensor networks. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00695v1) |
| [What is the Hierarchy Problem?](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00694v1) | Michael E. Peskin | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Is there a Hierarchy Problem? If so, what, exactly, is the problem? Almost every theorist has a personal answer to these questions. In this article, I give my answers. I will explain that the Hierarchy Problem is not a formal problem but rather our ignorance of a crucial physics explanation -- the explanation of the nature of the Higgs boson. Without the solution to this problem, we cannot make progress on the major questions of our field. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00694v1) |
| [Multi-wavelength JWST observations of (3200) Phaethon show a dehydrated
  object with an aqueously altered origin](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00692v1) | Cristina A. Thomas, Andrew S. Rivkin, Ian Wong, Matthew M. Knight, Sean E. Marshall, Christopher W. Haberle, Aidan Madden-Watson, Joshua P. Emery, Annika Gustafsson, Stefanie N. Milam, Heidi B. Hammel, Ellen S. Howell, Ronald J. Vervack Jr | 2025-05-01 | General AI | We present JWST observations of the near-Earth asteroid (3200) Phaethon using the Near-Infrared Camera (NIRCam), Near-Infrared Spectrograph (NIRSpec), and Mid-Infrared Instrument (MIRI) to further investigate the composition of Phaethon's surface. Our NIRSpec data confirms that Phaethon's surface is dehydrated, showing no evidence of hydrated minerals in the 3-$\mu$m region. We estimate an upper limit on the hydrogen content in phyllosilicates of 0.06 wt%. Comparisons with laboratory spectra of carbonaceous chondrites suggest that Phaethon's surface composition is best matched by thermally metamorphosed samples of the CM chondrite Murchison (heated to 1000$^{\circ}$C), rather than CY meteorites as previous work suggested. We find no evidence of ongoing surface evolution due to recent perihelion passages. A comparison of the mid-infrared spectra of Phaethon and Bennu shows distinct spectral differences that are consistent with their different thermal histories. Our findings further refine our understanding of Phaethon's current surface composition and evolution and provide additional insights for the upcoming DESTINY+ mission. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00692v1) |
| [Axially symmetric collapses in the 2-D Benjamin-Ono equation](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00689v1) | Joseph O. Oloo, Victor I. Shrira | 2025-05-01 | General AI | We study the nonlinear dynamics of localized perturbations within the framework of the essentially two-dimensional generalization of the Benjamin-Ono equation (2D-BO) derived asymptotically from the Navier-Stokes equation. By simulating the 2D-BO equation with the pseudospectral method, we confirm that the localized initial perturbations exceeding a certain threshold collapse, forming a point singularity. Although the 2D-BO equation does not possess axial symmetry, we show that in the vicinity of the collapse singularity, the solution becomes axially-symmetric, whatever its initial shape. We find that perturbations collapse in a self-similar manner, with the perturbation amplitude exploding as $ (\check \tau)^{-\lambda}$ and its transverse scale shrinking as $ (\check \tau)^{\lambda}$, where $\check \tau$ is the time to the moment of singularity. We derive a family of self-similar solutions describing axially symmetric collapses. The value of the free parameter $ {\lambda}$ in the self-similar solution is specified by fitting it to the numerical simulation of the initial problem of the evolution of an initially localized perturbation. Remarkably, for the examples we examined the value of the parameter proved to be almost universal: $ {\lambda} \approx 0.9$; its dependence on the initial conditions is indiscernible. In the vicinity of the singularity, the dynamics becomes one-dimensional, thus, the derived reduction of the 2D-BO equation provides an effectively one-dimensional model of collapse. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00689v1) |
| [Quantum information engines: Bounds on performance metrics by
  measurement time](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00686v1) | Henning Kirchberg, Abraham Nitzan | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Information engines, sometimes referred to as Maxwell Demon engines, utilize information obtained through measurement to control the conversion of energy into useful work. Discussions around such devices often assume the measurement step to be instantaneous, assessing its cost by Landauer's information erasure within the measurement device. While this simplified perspective is sufficient for classical feedback-controlled engines, for nanoengines that often operate in the quantum realm, the overall performance may be significantly affected by the measurement duration (which may be comparable to the engine's cycle time) and cost (energy needed to create the system-meter correlation). In this study, we employ a generalized von-Neumann measurement model to highlight that obtaining a finite amount of information requires a finite measurement time and incurs an energetic cost. We investigate the crucial role of these factors in determining the engine's performance, particularly in terms of efficiency and power output. Furthermore, for the information engine model under consideration, we establish a precise relationship between the acquired information in the measurement process and the maximum energy extractable through the measurement. We also discuss ways to extend our considerations using these concepts, such as in measurement-enhanced photochemical reactions. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00686v1) |
| [Quantum Circuit Overhead](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00683v1) | Oskar Słowik, Piotr Dulian, Adam Sawicki | 2025-05-01 | General AI | We introduce a measure for evaluating the efficiency of finite universal quantum gate sets $\mathcal{S}$, called the Quantum Circuit Overhead (QCO), and the related notion of $T$-Quantum Circuit Overhead ($T$-QCO). The overhead is based on the comparison between the efficiency of $\mathcal{S}$ versus the optimal efficiency among all gate sets with the same number of gates. We demonstrate the usefulness of the ($T$-)QCO by extensive numerical calculations of its upper bounds, providing insight into the efficiency of various choices of single-qubit $\mathcal{S}$, including Haar-random gate sets and the gate sets derived from finite subgroups, such as Clifford and Hurwitz groups. In particular, our results suggest that, in terms of the upper bounds on the $T$-QCO, the famous T gate is a highly non-optimal choice for the completion of the Clifford gate set, even among the gates of order 8. We identify the optimal choices of such completions for both finite subgroups. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00683v1) |
| [Comma 2-comonad I: Eilenberg-Moore 2-category of colax coalgebras](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00682v1) | Igor Baković | 2025-05-01 | General AI | In this paper we describe a comma 2-comonad on the 2-category whose objects are functors, 1-cell are colax squares and 2-cells are their transformations. We give a complete description of the Eilenberg-Moore 2-category of colax coalgebras, colax morphisms between them and their transformations and we show how many fundamental constructions in formal category theory like adjoint triples, distributive laws, comprehension structures, Frobenius functors etc. naturally fit in this context. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00682v1) |
| [Rational points on $X_0(N)^*$ when $N$ is non-squarefree](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00680v1) | Sachi Hashimoto, Timo Keller, Samuel Le Fourn | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Let $N$ be a non-squarefree integer such that the quotient $X_0(N)^*$ of the modular curve $X_0(N)$ by the full group of Atkin-Lehner involutions has positive genus. We establish an integrality result for the $j$-invariants of non-cuspidal rational points on $X_0(N)^*$, representing a significant step toward resolving a key subcase of Elkies' conjecture. To this end, we prove the existence of rank-zero quotients of certain modular Jacobians $J_0(pq)$. Furthermore, we provide a conjecturally complete classification of the rational points on $X_0(N)^*$ of genus $1 \leq g \leq 5$. In the process we identify exceptional rational points on $X_0(147)^*$ and $X_0(75)^*$ which were not known before. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00680v1) |
| [Steering Large Language Models with Register Analysis for Arbitrary
  Style Transfer](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00679v1) | Xinchen Yang, Marine Carpuat | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities in rewriting text across various styles. However, effectively leveraging this ability for example-based arbitrary style transfer, where an input text is rewritten to match the style of a given exemplar, remains an open challenge. A key question is how to describe the style of the exemplar to guide LLMs toward high-quality rewrites. In this work, we propose a prompting method based on register analysis to guide LLMs to perform this task. Empirical evaluations across multiple style transfer tasks show that our prompting approach enhances style transfer strength while preserving meaning more effectively than existing prompting strategies. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00679v1) |
| [Photonic Crystal Microring Resonators on a Hybrid Silicon
  Nitride-on-Lithium Niobate Platform](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00678v1) | Zhongdi Peng, Rakesh Krishna, Xi Wu, Amir H. Hosseinnia, Tianren Fan, Ali Adibi | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Photonic-crystal resonators (PhCRs) have been widely used in nonlinear integrated photonics for frequency engineering applications. A microwave-assisted frequency converter based on PhCRs highlights its precise control of frequency (enabled by creation of a pair of supermodes by a corrugated PhCR) and bidirectional frequency conversion. In this paper, we demonstrate a high-quality PhCR on a hybrid silicon nitride-on-lithium niobate-on-insulator (SiN-on-LNOI) platform for the first time for voltage-driven flexible frequency conversion using the electro-optic effect (0.85 pm/V). The fabricated PhCR has a large supermode splitting bandwidth = 14.6 GHz and an intrinsic quality factor (Q) = 147,000. Using different periodic corrugation amplitudes in the fabricated PhCRs enables the precise control of mode splitting with a ratio of 93.5 MHz/nm between the mode splitting bandwidth and the corrugation amplitude. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00678v1) |
| [Spectral-timing analysis of the kilohertz quasi-periodic oscillations
  and constraints on the mass of the neutron star in $4U 1636-536$ using
  AstroSat observations](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00676v1) | Suchismito Chattopadhyay, Soma Mandal, Ranjeev Misra | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Kilohertz quasi-periodic oscillations (kHz QPOs) are believed to originate from the orbital timescales of the inner accretion flow, reflecting the dynamics of the innermost disk regions under strong gravitational forces. Despite numerous radiative and geometric models proposed so far, a comprehensive explanation of the observed properties of these variability components remains elusive. This study systematically examines kHz QPOs, their variability, and their connection to spectral properties in $4U 1636-536$ using AstroSat data. Our analysis tracks the source transition from hard to soft states in the hardness-intensity diagram. Broad spectral analysis (0.7-25 keV) using SXT and LAXPC data indicates a spectrum shaped by reflection from a thermal corona, with contributions from boundary layer emission and a soft disk component. We find significant changes in optical depth, blackbody temperature, and inner disk temperature that likely drive state transitions. Power density spectra reveal three variability types: a low frequency QPO (LFQPOs) (~30 Hz), and two simultaneous kHz QPOs. The LFQPOs and the upper kHz QPOs appear more prominently in soft spectral states. The presence of LFQPOs and twin kHz QPOs in soft spectral states enable us to estimate the neutron star mass at (2.37 $\pm$ 0.02) $M_\odot$ using the relativistic precession model (RPM). Additionally, time-lag and root mean square (rms) analysis provide insights into the size of the corona and the radiative origin of these variability components. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00676v1) |
| [Rethinking Memory in AI: Taxonomy, Operations, Topics, and Future
  Directions](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00675v1) | Yiming Du, Wenyu Huang, Danna Zheng, Zhaowei Wang, Sebastien Montella, Mirella Lapata, Kam-Fai Wong, Jeff Z. Pan | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Memory is a fundamental component of AI systems, underpinning large language models (LLMs) based agents. While prior surveys have focused on memory applications with LLMs, they often overlook the atomic operations that underlie memory dynamics. In this survey, we first categorize memory representations into parametric, contextual structured, and contextual unstructured and then introduce six fundamental memory operations: Consolidation, Updating, Indexing, Forgetting, Retrieval, and Compression. We systematically map these operations to the most relevant research topics across long-term, long-context, parametric modification, and multi-source memory. By reframing memory systems through the lens of atomic operations and representation types, this survey provides a structured and dynamic perspective on research, benchmark datasets, and tools related to memory in AI, clarifying the functional interplay in LLMs based agents while outlining promising directions for future research\footnote{The paper list, datasets, methods and tools are available at \href{https://github.com/Elvin-Yiming-Du/Survey_Memory_in_AI}{https://github.com/Elvin-Yiming-Du/Survey\_Memory\_in\_AI}.}. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00675v1) |
| [Offset Charge Dependence of Measurement-Induced Transitions in Transmons](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00674v1) | Mathieu Féchant, Marie Frédérique Dumas, Denis Bénâtre, Nicolas Gosling, Philipp Lenhard, Martin Spiecker, Wolfgang Wernsdorfer, Benjamin D'Anjou, Alexandre Blais, Ioan M. Pop | 2025-05-01 | General AI | A key challenge in achieving scalable fault tolerance in superconducting quantum processors is readout fidelity, which lags behind one- and two-qubit gate fidelity. A major limitation in improving qubit readout is measurement-induced transitions, also referred to as qubit ionization, caused by multiphoton qubit-resonator excitation occurring at specific photon numbers. Since ionization can involve highly excited states, it has been predicted that in transmons -- the most widely used superconducting qubit -- the photon number at which measurement-induced transitions occur is gate charge dependent. This dependence is expected to persist deep in the transmon regime where the qubit frequency is gate charge insensitive. We experimentally confirm this prediction by characterizing measurement-induced transitions with increasing resonator photon population while actively stabilizing the transmon's gate charge. Furthermore, because highly excited states are involved, achieving quantitative agreement between theory and experiment requires accounting for higher-order harmonics in the transmon Hamiltonian. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00674v1) |
| [Strange correlator and string order parameter for non-invertible
  symmetry protected topological phases in 1+1d](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00673v1) | Da-Chuan Lu, Fu Xu, Yi-Zhuang You | 2025-05-01 | General AI | In this paper, we construct strange correlators and string order parameters for non-invertible symmetry protected topological phases (NISPTs) in 1+1d quantum lattice spin models. The strange correlator exhibits long-range order when evaluated between two distinct NISPTs and decays exponentially otherwise. We show that strange charged operators inserted into the strange correlator are linked to the interface algebra (boundary tube algebra) and are non-trivial when all its irreducible representations have dimensions greater than one. We discuss the generalization to higher dimensions. The string order parameter is obtained by contracting the truncated symmetry operator with charge decoration operators, which are determined by the NISPT action tensors. We illustrate the above construction using the three NISPTs of $\text{Rep}(D_8)$ and demonstrate the extraction of categorical data via tensor networks, particularly through the ZX calculus. Finally, we show that the entanglement spectrum degeneracy is determined by the irreducible representations of the interface algebra when assuming non-invertible symmetry on-site condition. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00673v1) |
| [On Minimal Generating Sets of Splitting Field and Cluster Towers](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00672v1) | Shubham Jaiswal, P Vanchinathan | 2025-05-01 | General AI | The concept of cluster towers was introduced by the second author and Krithika in [4] along with a question which was answered by the first author and Bhagwat in [1]. In this article we introduce the concept of minimal generating sets of splitting field and connect it to the concept of cluster towers. We establish that there exist infinitely many irreducible polynomials over rationals for which the splitting field has two extreme minimal generating sets (one of given cardinality and other of minimum cardinality) and for which we have two extreme cluster towers (one of given length and other of minimum length). We prove interesting properties of cluster tower associated with minimal generating set that we constructed in proof of the theorem and as a consequence get that degree sequence depends on the ordering even when we work with minimal generating set. We also establish an equivalent condition for a set to be minimum minimal generating set for a certain family of polynomials over rationals and count the total number of minimum minimal generating sets. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00672v1) |
| [Direct spectral problems for Paley-Wiener canonical systems](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00669v1) | Ashley R. Zhang | 2025-05-01 | General AI | This note focuses on the direct spectral problem for canonical Hamiltonian systems on the half-line $\mathbb{R}_+$. Truncated Toeplitz operators have been effectively used to solve the inverse spectral problem when the spectral measure is a locally finite periodic measure (see \cite{MP}). Here, we reverse the inverse problem algorithm to solve the direct spectral problem for step-function Hamiltonians. For a non-step-function Hamiltonian, we consider its step-function approximations and their corresponding spectral measures, and show that these spectral measures converge to the spectral measure of the original Hamiltonian. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00669v1) |
| [A Practical Framework for Simulating Time-Resolved Spectroscopy Based on
  a Real-time Dyson Expansion](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00667v1) | Cian Reeves, Michael Kurniawan, Yuanran Zhu, Nikil Jampana, Jacob Brown, Chao Yang, Khaled Ibrahim, Vojtech Vlcek | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Time-resolved spectroscopy is a powerful tool for probing electron dynamics in molecules and solids, revealing transient phenomena on sub-femtosecond timescales. The interpretation of experimental results is often enhanced by parallel numerical studies, which can provide insight and validation for experimental hypotheses. However, developing a theoretical framework for simulating time-resolved spectra remains a significant challenge. The most suitable approach involves the many-body non-equilibrium Green's function formalism, which accounts for crucial dynamical many-body correlations during time evolution. While these dynamical correlations are essential for observing emergent behavior in time-resolved spectra, they also render the formalism prohibitively expensive for large-scale simulations. Substantial effort has been devoted to reducing this computational cost -- through approximations and numerical techniques -- while preserving the key dynamical correlations. The ultimate goal is to enable first-principles simulations of time-dependent systems ranging from small molecules to large, periodic, multidimensional solids. In this perspective, we outline key challenges in developing practical simulations for time-resolved spectroscopy, with a particular focus on Green's function methodologies. We highlight a recent advancement toward a scalable framework: the real-time Dyson expansion (RT-DE). We introduce the theoretical foundation of RT-DE and discuss strategies for improving scalability, which have already enabled simulations of system sizes beyond the reach of previous fully dynamical approaches. We conclude with an outlook on future directions for extending RT-DE to first-principles studies of dynamically correlated, non-equilibrium systems. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00667v1) |
| [Spreading Depolarization Detection in Electrocorticogram Spectrogram
  Imaging by Deep Learning: Is It Just About Delta Band?](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00666v1) | Jeanne Boyer-Chammard, Yinzhe Wu, Chenyu Zhang, Sharon Jewell, Anthony Strong, Guang Yang, Martyn Boutelle | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Prevention of secondary brain injury is a core aim of neurocritical care, with Spreading Depolarizations (SDs) recognized as a significant independent cause. SDs are typically monitored through invasive, high-frequency electrocorticography (ECoG); however, detection remains challenging due to signal artifacts that obscure critical SD-related electrophysiological changes, such as power attenuation and DC drifting. Recent studies suggest spectrogram analysis could improve SD detection; however, brain injury patients often show power reduction across all bands except delta, causing class imbalance. Previous methods focusing solely on delta mitigates imbalance but overlooks features in other frequencies, limiting detection performance. This study explores using multi-frequency spectrogram analysis, revealing that essential SD-related features span multiple frequency bands beyond the most active delta band. This study demonstrated that further integration of both alpha and delta bands could result in enhanced SD detection accuracy by a deep learning model. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00666v1) |
| [Auditing without Leaks Despite Curiosity](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00665v1) | Hagit Attiya, Antonio Fernández Anta, Alessia Milani, Alexandre Rapetti, Corentin Travers | 2025-05-01 | General AI | \textit{Auditing} data accesses helps preserve privacy and ensures accountability by allowing one to determine who accessed (potentially sensitive) information. A prior formal definition of register auditability was based on the values returned by read operations, \emph{without accounting for cases where a reader might learn a value without explicitly reading it or gain knowledge of data access without being an auditor}.   This paper introduces a refined definition of auditability that focuses on when a read operation is \emph{effective}, rather than relying on its completion and return of a value. Furthermore, we formally specify the constraints that \textit{prevent readers from learning values they did not explicitly read or from auditing other readers' accesses.}   Our primary algorithmic contribution is a wait-free implementation of a \emph{multi-writer, multi-reader register} that tracks effective reads while preventing unauthorized audits. The key challenge is ensuring that a read is auditable as soon as it becomes effective, which we achieve by combining value access and access logging into a single atomic operation. Another challenge is recording accesses without exposing them to readers, which we address using a simple encryption technique (one-time pad).   We extend this implementation to an \emph{auditable max register} that tracks the largest value ever written. The implementation deals with the additional challenge posed by the max register semantics, which allows readers to learn prior values without reading them.   The max register, in turn, serves as the foundation for implementing an \emph{auditable snapshot} object and, more generally, \emph{versioned types}. These extensions maintain the strengthened notion of auditability, appropriately adapted from multi-writer, multi-reader registers. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00665v1) |
| [AI-based CSI Feedback with Digital Twins: Real-World Validation and
  Insights](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00660v2) | Tzu-Hao Huang, Chao-Kai Wen, Shang-Ho Tsai, Trung Q. Duong | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Deep learning (DL) has shown great potential for enhancing channel state information (CSI) feedback in multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) communication systems, a subject currently under study by the 3GPP standards body. Digital twins (DTs) have emerged as an effective means to generate site-specific datasets for training DL-based CSI feedback models. However, most existing studies rely solely on simulations, leaving the effectiveness of DTs in reducing DL training costs yet to be validated through realistic experimental setups. This paper addresses this gap by establishing a real-world (RW) environment and corresponding virtual channels using ray tracing with replicated 3D models and accurate antenna properties. We evaluate whether models trained in DT environments can effectively operate in RW scenarios and quantify the benefits of online learning (OL) for performance enhancement. Results show that a dedicated DT remains essential even with OL to achieve satisfactory performance in RW scenarios. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00660v2) |
| [It's All ${\tt Ok}$: Curvature in Light of BAO from DESI DR2](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00659v1) | Shi-Fan Chen, Matias Zaldarriaga | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Recent measurements of baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) from the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) show hints of tension with data from the cosmic microwave background (CMB) when interpreted within the standard model of cosmology. In this short note we discuss the consequences of one solution to this tension, a small but negative spatial curvature with $R_k = 21 H_0^{-1}$, which DESI measures at $2\sigma$. We describe the physical role of curvature in cosmological distance measures tied to recombination, i.e. the CMB and BAO, and the relation to neutrino mass constraints which are relaxed to $\sum m_\nu < 0.10$ eV when curvature is allowed to deviate from zero. A robust detection of negative curvature would have significant implications for inflationary models: improved BAO measurements, particularly from future high-redshift spectroscopic surveys, will be able to distinguish curvature from other solutions to the DESI-CMB tension like phantom dark energy at high significance. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00659v1) |
| [Why the hyperbolic polaritons are hyperbolic?](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00655v1) | Xiaoyu Xiong, Le Zhou, Yihang Fan, Weipeng Wang, Yongzheng Wen, Yang Shen, Zhengjun Zhang, Jingbo Sun, Ji Zhou | 2025-05-01 | General AI | Polaritons travelling along a hyperbolic medium's surface have recently sparked significant interest in nanophotonics for the unprecedented manipulation ability on light at the nanoscale in a planar way, promising potential nano-optical applications, especially in two-dimensional circuitry. Despite of being named hyperbolic polaritons, the hyperbolic nature has not been thoroughly revealed since an analytical description of the Iso-frequency contour is still elusive. In this work, we proposed an analytical form for describing the iso-frequency contour of the hyperbolic polaritons, showcasing their strictly hyperbolic nature. Such an analytical form is obtained based on the focusing behavior of the hyperbolic polaritons and verified by both the published data from commonly used hyperbolic media systems of the hyperbolic polaritons and our own experimental characterizations on a hyperbolic metamaterial film. By presenting a concise and intuitive physical image, this work may provide a groundbreaking methodology in developing novel hyperbolic polaritons based optical devices. | [🔗 Paper](http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00655v1) |
